blog: Using virtualenvwrapper for managing Python virtual env (#798)
RSE-Sheffield/RSE-Sheffield.github.io: _posts/2024-08-11-python-virtualenvwrapper.md

---
layout: post
title: "Python Virtualenvwrapper"
author: Neil Shephard
slug: 2024-08-11-python-virtualenvwrapper

> date: 2024-08-11 12:00:00 UTC

Reviewer: These might want updating (though its probably fine too)

tags: python "virtual environment" anaconda virtualenvwrapper pip
category:
link:
description:
social_image: https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/53176160657_1a148b3c36_k.jpg
type: text
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Recently the use of [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/) has been highlighted as problematic for those working in a
research environment because of the restrictive
[licensing](https://legal.anaconda.com/policies/en/?name=terms-of-service) that is starting to be
[enforced](https://www.theregister.com/2024/08/08/anaconda_puts_the_squeeze_on/). This article introduces another option
[virtualenvwrapper](https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for creating and working with
[Python](https://www.python/org) Virtual Environments showing how to install and use it and highlighting some useful
features.

<!--more-->

<div style="width: 80%; margin:0 auto;"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/53176160657_1a148b3c36_k.jpg"
alt="Clouds Rising at Sunset in the Julian Alps"/><p>Photo by <a

> href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/slackline/53176160657/" target="_blank">Neil Shephard</a>.</p></div>

Reviewer: Not sure the image is relevant? (but its fine too)

Author: I like pictures in blogs, might draw people in. My choice of this one is because of the tiered mountains and valleys giving similar sorts of environments (very loose connection!).

If you use [Python](https://www.python/org) regularly chances are you are familiar with and use virtual environments to
isolate the installed packages as you develop your code from the Python packages installed at the system level. The

> standard libraries [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html), [pipx](https://github.com/pypa/pipx),

Reviewer 2: Query use of 'standard libraries': `venv` is a standard library (part of core Python), the others are not?

[virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest/) and [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/) are all popular options,

> perhaps the later being the most popular for its ease of use. Many of the popular package development suites such as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
perhaps the last being the most popular for its ease of use. Many of the popular package development suites such as
```

[Hatch](https://hatch.pypa.io/latest/), [PDM](https://pdm-project.org/latest/) and [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/)
will also manage virtual environments for you too. One you might not have come across is
[virtualenvwrapper](https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) which is...

> _a set of extensions to Ian Bicking’s virtualenv tool. The extensions include wrappers for creating and deleting
> virtual environments and otherwise managing your development workflow, making it easier to work on more than one
> project at a time without introducing conflicts in their dependencies._

> **NB** If you are using Microsoft Windows it is recommended that you install and use [Windows Subsystem for

Reviewer: Suggesting users install WSL to follow along feels a bit strong. 

Just stating that the following examples assume linux, and OSX/Windows users will have to do things a bit differntly (if it supports native windows) might be better?

Author: Works for OSX, its just Windows that does it all differently (unless they use WSL).

I'll tweak it though and point Windows users to the docs.

Linux](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) to follow along.

> ## What are Virtual Environments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What are Virtual Environments?
```

Before getting started a quick recap for readers who aren't familiar with virtual environments.

> When you run programmes at the command line such as invoking `python`, whether that is GNU/Linux, Mac OSX or Microsoft

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you run programmes,  such as invoking `python`, at the command line, whether that is GNU/Linux, Mac OSX or Microsoft
```

Windows, the operating system searches for the command you run in a defined set of places. It doesn't look everywhere,

> rather it looks in the locations defined by an environment variable called `$PATH`. This is a variable holds a set of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
rather it looks in the locations defined by an environment variable called `$PATH`. This variable holds a set of
```

> paths to locations to look for executable/binary programmes, you can inspect its value with `echo $PATH` and it lists

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
paths to locations in which to look for executable/binary programmes and it lists
```

> all paths that are searched for executable files separated by colons (`:`). The order in which the listed paths are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
all paths that are searched for executable files separated by colons (`:`).  You can inspect its value with `echo $PATH`. The order in which the listed paths are
```

checked takes left-to-right precedence and on my system this looks like the following.

``` bash
❱ echo $PATH
/home/neil/.local/share/pnpm:/home/neil/bin:/home/neil/.cargo/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/opt/bin:/usr/lib/llvm/18/bin:/usr/lib/llvm/17/bin:/home/neil/.local/bin:/home/neil/.cargo/bin:/home/neil/.node/bin
```

Thus if I invoke `python` the first path that is checked for a binary with that name is `/home/neil/.local/share/pnpm`

> if one isn't found the second is checked (`/home/neil/bin`), then the third (`/home/neil/.cargo/bin`) and so on until a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus if I invoke `python` the first path that is checked for a binary with that name is `/home/neil/.local/share/pnpm`.
If one isn't found the second is checked (`/home/neil/bin`), then the third (`/home/neil/.cargo/bin`) and so on until a
```

> match is found. If no match is found. You can check the path to a given binary using `which` if no such

Reviewer 2: Incomplete sentence? 'If not match is found...'

> match is found. If no match is found. You can check the path to a given binary using `which` if no such

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
match is found. If no match is found. You can check the path to a given binary using `which`. If no such
```

your user account that contains a copy of `python` and the specific set of packages you have installed under that
environment. We'll cover this in more detail but if I look at the `$PATH` variable _after_ having activated the
`topostats` virtual environment you will see that its value has been modified and the _first_ directory that is checked
is `/home/neil/.virtualenvs/topostats/bin` and if I check which version of `python` is used it is the one within this
directory.

``` bash
❱ echo $PATH
/home/neil/.virtualenvs/topostats/bin:/home/neil/.local/share/pnpm:/home/neil/miniconda3/condabin:/home/neil/bin:/home/neil/.cargo/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/opt/bin:/usr/lib/llvm/18/bin:/usr/lib/llvm/17/bin:/home/neil/.local/bin:/home/neil/.cargo/bin:/home/neil/.node/bin
❱ which python
/home/neil/.virtualenvs/topostats/bin/python
```

## Managing Virtual Environments with `virtualenvwrapper`

As the name suggests [`virtualenvwrapper`](https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is a wrapper for the
[`virtualenv`](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest/) package that adds a bunch of convenience functions and features

> that, in this authors view, make it easier to install, activate/deactivate and manage your virtual environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that, in this author's view, make it easier to install, activate/deactivate and manage your virtual environments.
```

### Installation

I recommend installing `virtualenvwrapper` at the system level, ideally with your systems package manager. Under
different GNU/Linux or OSX using Homebrew this can be done with...

``` bash
❱ sudo pacman -Syu virtualenvwrapper       # Arch
❱ sudo emerge -av virtualenvwrapper        # Gentoo
❱ sudo apt-get install virtualenvwrapper   # Debian/Ubuntu
❱ brew install virtualenvwrapper           # OSX Homebrew
```

> ...or if you are happy installing packages using you can follow the [official installation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
...or if you are happy installing packages using `pip` you can follow the [official installation
```
I think?

The values of `PROJECT_HOME` should be specific to where you wish to create your projects, whilst the argument to
`source` will depend on how you have installed `virtualenvwrapper`, you can check using `which` so use the value
returned by

``` bash
❱ which virtualenvwrapper.sh
/usr/bin/virtualenvwrapper.sh
```

### Always using a virtual environment

Once in `virtualenvwrapper` is installed you can change a configuration option to `pip` to ensure that you are _always_
using a virtual environment when you attempt to install packages using `pip` by adding the following to the
`~/.config/pip/pip.conf` file on your system.

``` bash
[global]
require-virtualenv = True
```

## Creating a Virtual Environment with `virtualenvwrapper`

This is straight-forward.

```bash
❱ mkvirtualenv test_env
```

By default on creating a new virtual environment it is activated and your prompt should change to reflect this with the
environment name appearing as part of the prompt. You can check that the `python` that will be executed resides in this
directory using `which`.

```bash
(test_env) ❱ which python
/home/neil/.virtualenvs/test_env/bin/python
```

## Activating/Deactivating Virtual Environment

> You have been dropped into the `test_env` virtual environment to exit from it use the `deactivate` command, again you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You have been dropped into the `test_env` virtual environment. To exit from it use the `deactivate` command, again you
```

can check which version of `python` is found on your `$PATH` using `which`.

```bash
(test_env) ❱ deactivate
(test_env) ❱ which python
/usr/bin/python
```

You won't always create a virtual environment when you want to use it though, that would be a waste of time and
bandwidth downloading and installing packages (although these are cached and used if no new updates are available). To
activate an existing virtual environment you use the `workon` command.

``` bash
 ❱ workon test_env
(test_env) ❱
```

> ## Project Directories

Reviewer 2: Might be good to say something about what it means to have set a project associated with your virtual env - e.g. switching to project directories behaviour.

Author: Good point have done so, ta :+1:

using the `mkproject` command instead of `mkvirtualenv`. The project directory is stored in the `$PROJECT_HOME` path
you will have configured during [installation](installation). You can then create a project _and_  a virtual environment
with...

```bash
mkproject new_project
```

### Manually setting Project Directories

If you don't use `mkproject` to create a project you can set it manually after activating a virtual environment using
`setvirtualenvproject` in the desired directory. This adds an entry to the `~/.virtualenv/<env_name>/.project` file
that reflects the directory associated with the environment.

### Disabling Switching to Project Directories

The environment variable `VIRTUALENVWRAPPER_WORKON_CD` "_controls whether the working directory is changed during the
post activate phase. The default is `1`, to enable changing directories. Set the value to `0` to disable this behaviour
for all invocations of `workon`_". If this is something you _don't_ want to happen you should set this in your
`~/.bashrc` or `./zshrc`, otherwise the default can be left alone.

``` bash
export VIRTUALENVWRAPPER_WORKON_CD=0
```

## Deactivating and Removing Virtual Environments

> Its straight-forward to deactivate the current virtual environment just type `deactivate`. Similarly you can remove a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Removing Virtual Environments

You can remove a
```
You already covered deactivate ☝️

virtual environment with `rmvirtualenv <env_name>`.

One neat option if you want to keep a virtual environment but install all packages anew is the ability to remove all

> third-party packages in the current virtual environment using `wipeenv`. You can then use `pip` to reinstall a packages

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
third-party packages in the current virtual environment using `wipeenv`. You can then use `pip` to reinstall a package's
```

dependencies or a set of packages from a `requirements.txt` file.

## Temporary Virtual Environments

Sometimes you just want to try something out quickly in a clean virtual environment, if for example you are reviewing a

> Pull Request and want to check installation and testes pass. `virtualenvwrapper` can help here as it has the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pull Request and want to check installation and tests pass. `virtualenvwrapper` can help here as it has the
```

Author: Ooops, I doubt many people want to see `testes pass`!

### Install minimal requirements

I'm a big fan of [dotfiles](https://dotfiles.github.io)[^1], mine are [hosted on
GitLab](https://gitlab.com/nshephard/dotfiles/), it's a repository of my configuration files and scripts that I use
regularly across multiple computers.  Because I'm lazy I wrote a couple of `requirements.txt` files for installing
packages in my virtual environments.

+ [`requirements.txt`](https://gitlab.com/nshephard/dotfiles/-/blob/master/python/requirements.txt) :
  holds everything I might ever want to use in Python.
+ [`python-lsp-requirements.txt`](https://gitlab.com/nshephard/dotfiles/-/blob/master/python/requirements.txt) :
  Install packages for setting up a Python Language Server (which I use from Emacs).
+ [`venv_minimal_requirements.txt`](https://gitlab.com/nshephard/dotfiles/-/blob/master/python/venv_minimal_requirements.txt)
  : a minimal set of the most common Python packages I am likely to want when creating a new virtual environment.

Because I have my `dotfiles` cloned to the same location on every computer (`~/dotfiles`) I added the following to the
`~/.virtualenvs/postmkvirtualenv` [^2] which will install all of the packages listed in

> `~/dotfiles/python/venv_minimal_requirements.txt` whenever a create a new virtual environment, whether that is with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`~/dotfiles/python/venv_minimal_requirements.txt` whenever I create a new virtual environment, whether that is with
```

> `mkvritualenv` or `mktmpenv`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`mkvirtualenv` or `mktmpenv`.
```

```bash
pip install --no-cache-dir -r ~/dotfiles/python/venv_minimal_requirements.txt
```

> This ensured the latest versions of each packages listed in `~/dotfiles/python/venv_minimal_requirements.txt` were

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This ensured the latest versions of each package listed in `~/dotfiles/python/venv_minimal_requirements.txt` were
```

[documentation](https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) is excellent and worth reading in detail if this
introductory article has sparked your interest as there are more than options than those covered here.

**NB** This post is based on (and hopefully improves on) two earlier blogs made by the author...

+ [virtualenvwrapper](https://blog.nshephard.dev/posts/virtualenvwrapper/)
+ [virtualenvwrapper hooks](https://blog.nshephard.dev/posts/virtualenv-hooks/)

## Links

+ [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/)
+ [Hatch](https://hatch.pypa.io/latest/)
+ [PDM](https://pdm-project.org/latest/)
+ [pipx](https://github.com/pypa/pipx)
+ [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/)
+ [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html)
+ [virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest/)
+ [virtualenvwrapper](https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

[^1]: There is a wealth of information on what you can do with your `dotfiles` but that is an article in itself and I'm
    yet to write it. A useful set of different aliases you could use can be found
    [here](https://dotfiles.io/about/#introduction).

> [^2]: Actually I create the script in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

[^2]: Actually I create the script in
```
